#summary Installation on MacOS X

Thanks to Michael Zeineh for providing these instructions.

= Installation =

Installation on MacOS X relies on the packages made available by the [http://www.finkproject.org Fink project]. This project provides Mac versions of the dependencies required to compile MRtrix. Once the dependencies are installed, MRtrix itself can be compiled and installed.


Here are the complete instructions:

  # Install the Fink applications, by following [http://www.finkproject.org/download/index.php these instructions].
  # Use Fink to install dependencies: <br> `fink install python glib gtk+ glibmm2.4 gtkmm2.4 gtkglext1 gsl` <br> You may need to repeat the command above multiple times for it complete successfully.
  # build MRtrix: <br> `$ cd mrtrix-0.2.X` <br> `$ ./build`
  # once the compilation stage is complete, copy the contents to a more suitable folder, and change permissions to make it accessible for all users: <br> `$ cp -r * /usr/local/mrtrix` <br> `$ chmod -R a+rX /usr/local/mrtrix`
  # change the path to include /usr/local/mrtrix
  # set the library search path appropriately: <br> `export DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH="/usr/local/mrtrix/lib"`

At this point, you should be able to start using MRtrix. You may also want to set up [UnixInstallation#Enable_multi-threading multi-threading], as per the UnixInstallation instructions, to make full use of a multi-core processor.


You may encounter problems related to the freetype library. In this case, you may need to copy the /usr/x11/bin/libfreetype.6.dylib to /sw/lib/freetype219/lib.